---
layout: post
title: "DRAFT Liberalism as a personal value"
draft: true
---

_In this essay, "liberalism" is used in the European sense to mean
"classical liberalism", not to refer to the US political left._

Liberalism is often discussed in terms of the political ideology
bearing its name: rights and duties as pertains to the state and
formal power structures. This obscures an important, deeper level,
that of liberalism on a personal, moral level: without liberal people,
wishing to live a liberal life, the liberal political project cannot
succeed.

The particular prompt for this essay is my observations of reactions
to government recommendations and guidelines on how to respond to the
COVID-19 pandemic. A very substantial number of people seem to
explicitly desire exact instructions from the government on how to go
about their business and despair when such instructions are even a
little vague.

To me, it is self-evident that when a dangerous disease is circulating
in the population, everybody has a clear duty to take every reasonable
precaution to avoid contracting an infection and to avoid risking
passing any infection on. I admit to being slightly shocked at
realising this is not broadly shared, and that large parts of the
country could be confused by the change of the government slogan from
"Stay home" to "Stay alert".


I tweeted at the time:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">&quot;Stay
home&quot; is an extrinsic, hierarchical order. On the face of it,
easy to follow, but not really, as the myriad of exceptions show. Even
the police took weeks to settle on mostly-non-enforcement as the only
feasible implementation. 1/</p>&mdash; Martin Seebach (@mseebach) <a
href="https://twitter.com/mseebach/status/1259458778707169280?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">May
10, 2020</a></blockquote> <script async
src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js"
charset="utf-8"></script>

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-conversation="none"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">&quot;Stay alert&quot; on the other hand is intrinsic. As opposed to the ostensibly simpler rule, this one literally has zero exceptions, but it&#39;s harder because we have to actually think for ourselves. 2/</p>&mdash; Martin Seebach (@mseebach) <a href="https://twitter.com/mseebach/status/1259458779822936064?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">May 10, 2020</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-conversation="none"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">The baseline remains &quot;stay at home&quot;. But the exceptions are now devolved and no longer enumerated entitlements, individual decisions to be made by considering your specific context and situation and applying reason. 3/</p>&mdash; Martin Seebach (@mseebach) <a href="https://twitter.com/mseebach/status/1259458781894914053?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">May 10, 2020</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-conversation="none"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Will it be abused? Sure, but so was the old rule. The difference is that it gives licence to responsible, law-abiding citizen who have a reasonable errand, or even merely a desire they can fulfill responsibly. I.e what renegades were doing anyway. 4/</p>&mdash; Martin Seebach (@mseebach) <a href="https://twitter.com/mseebach/status/1259458783010533376?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">May 10, 2020</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-conversation="none"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Hard, simple rules have a time and a place, in narrow, well-understood contexts. Like traffic. But this isn&#39;t it. 5/</p>&mdash; Martin Seebach (@mseebach) <a href="https://twitter.com/mseebach/status/1259458784201781249?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">May 10, 2020</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-conversation="none"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">It&#39;s old news in the business world that intrinsic rules enable better outcomes than extrinsic ones in complex scenarios: people closer to the situation has more context and when given freedom, rather than a strict command, make better decisions. 6/</p>&mdash; Martin Seebach (@mseebach) <a href="https://twitter.com/mseebach/status/1259458785153818624?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">May 10, 2020</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-conversation="none"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">The flip side of this is that it requires a particular culture, one that values good outcomes over strict process, one that doesn&#39;t punish a failed good faith effort. The £1m question? Do we have that culture, do we want to have it, can we get it? 7/</p>&mdash; Martin Seebach (@mseebach) <a href="https://twitter.com/mseebach/status/1259458786185678850?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">May 10, 2020</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script> 

### Of the People, for the People

Liberals will often worry about the
effect that overbearing government policy has on personal attitudes
towards independent thought, responsibility and duty, and rightly
so. Is there such a thing a being a free person in a country governed
by a body of law so complex that no human can ever hope to even read
it, much less understand it? Where most people are regularly breaking
some law or other without even realising it? What is your duty to
solve a problem in front of you when there is already a government
agency tasked to solve that problem?

But one of the things that turned me off "hard" libertarianism is the
overwhelming focus on government. I believe that as things stand today
if we didn't have an overbearing state, the first thing people would
do would be to invent one. It would be smaller at first, but it would
grow quickly because there is a deep popular desire to make problems
someone else's. It's not so much "Rob Peter to pay Paul", but rather
"Rob Peter and Paul and tell them 'Don't worry, it's not your
problem'".

The current thicket of laws, regulations and agencies with vague
missions and poor accountability is a product of culture, and that
culture is rooted in a specific, only barely not articulated, demand
for the eradication of ambiguity. Personal senses of responsibility
have been eroded, which further strengthened the demand. At this
point, we are through so many iterations of this cycle that causality
is meaningless. It takes enormous amounts of political capital to win
even modest victories in the political scene, and the feedback to the
cycle is weak, making the endeavour Sisyphean. I am increasingly
convinced that liberal progress does not start with fighting state
power, but by figuring out how to make liberalism a personal, moral
value.

### Free speech and complex thought

Large government don't generally discourage free thought, as sometimes
suggested by "hard" libertarians, as much as it discourages complex
thought. People desire answers, and government grows in its attempts
to provide them. The result is a society full of answers, or at least
the expectation of them. "Stay home" is a clear answer to a question,
"stay alert" isn't, and the reaction to the latter betrays a negative
reaction to complex thought.

Few online discussions about free speech go on for long before someone
points out that "free speech" only protects individuals from the
state. That is true of the specific right enumerated in various
constitutions, laws and conventions. But for the personal liberal, the
right of free speech must certainly be protected from the state, but
the moral value of free speech is something else altogether.

True pluralism is the only soil where freedom can grow, and personal
liberals must seek to keep this soil healthy. [Psychological safety](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Psychological_safety) is getting
established as a desirable trait in business organisations because
this makes for more creative and productive teams.

"Psychological safety is a condition in which human beings feel (1)
included, (2) safe to learn, (3) safe to contribute, and (4) safe to
challenge the status quo – all without fear of being embarrassed,
marginalized, or punished in some way."  This is equally desirable in
society at large, and it is not productive to reduce discussion of
free speech to a legal matter -- it is a deeply moral matter.

What makes it a moral matter is the conflict with the equally
important value of free association, or in this case, critically, the
value of not associating with someone, and this kind of conflict is
exactly why we can't hope to resolve matters in a few lines of law. A
key skill for the personal liberal is complex thought, being
comfortable with ambiguity, with simply not knowing, and this is a
skill that is not taught or encouraged in society. Yet, this is the
skill managers are expected to learn and practise in business to
create psychological safety. We must learn to want to hear what we
don't want to hear, and we must learn to try to understand where it
comes from in good faith.
